docs/user-guide.rst, before:

User Guide
==========

.. currentmodule:: dataclay

.. note::
    You can also follow this guide by running side-by-side all the commands with the 
    :doc:`examples/quickstart` example.


Installation
------------

dataClay can be installed with `pip <https://pip.pypa.io>`_:

.. code-block:: console

  $ python3 -m pip install dataclay


Defining Classes
----------------

The model provider is responsible for designing and implementing class models: the data structure,
the methods, and the relationships that applications can use to access and process data.

A minimal dataClay class is defined like this:

.. literalinclude:: /../examples/quickstart/model/company.py
   :language: python

All dataClay classes must inherit from :class:`DataClayObject`. 

It is required to `annotate <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/annotations.html>`_ the fields that
are intended to be persisted in dataClay. The remaining fields will be ignored and will only be 
accessible by the local instance.

The methods should be decorated with :func:`@activemethod <activemethod>` to specify that they will be
executed in dataClay if the object is persistent. The rest of the methods will always be executed locally.

Connect Client
--------------

To connect to a dataClay, create a :class:`Client` instance and provide the host, username,
password and dataset to connect to. You can provide it as arguments or as environment variables:

- ``DC_HOST``: Hostname of the dataClay instance (i.e. metadata)
- ``DC_PORT``: Port of the dataClay instance (i.e. metadata)
- ``DC_USERNAME``: Username to connect to dataClay
- ``DC_PASSWORD``: Password to connect to dataClay
- ``DC_DATASET``: Dataset to connect to

.. code-block:: python

  from dataclay import Client

  client = Client(
    host="127.0.0.1", port="16587", username="testuser", password="s3cret", dataset="testdata"
  )

You can start the connection by calling :meth:`start() <Client.start>`
and stop it with :meth:`stop() <Client.stop>`::

    client.start()
    # do something
    client.stop()

You can also use the client as a context manager::

  with client:
      # do something

Make Persistent
---------------

To make a dataClay object persistent, call its :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>` method:: 

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent()

Then all methods decorated with :func:`@activemethod <activemethod>` will be executed in dataClay::

    payroll = employee.get_payroll(50) # One remote call

And all annotated attributes will be accessed and updated in dataClay,
potentially reducing the local memory footprint::

    employee.salary = 2000.0 # One remote call
    print(employee.name, employee.salary) # Two remote calls


Assign backend
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Every dataClay object is owned by a backend. When calling :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>`
we can specify the backend where the object will be registered. If no backend is specified, the object will be
registered in a random backend.

You can get a list of backend IDs with :meth:`get_backends() <Client.get_backends>`
and register a dataClay object to one of the backends::

    backend_ids = list(client.get_backends())
    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent(backend_id=backend_ids[0])

Recursive
^^^^^^^^^

By default, :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>` registers the current object
and all the dataClay objects referenced by it in a recursive manner::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    company = Company("ABC", employee)

    # company and employee are registered
    company.make_persistent()
    assert employee.is_registered

..
    This behavior can be disabled by passing ``recursive=False`` 
    to :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>`::

        employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
        company = Company("ABC", employee)

        company.make_persistent(recursive=False)
        assert company.is_registered
        assert not employee.is_registered

Automatic persistence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When you add a new reference of a dataClay object to a persistent object, 
it is automatically registered::

    company = Company("ABC")
    company.make_persistent()

    # New dataClay object
    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    # This will register the employee in dataClay
    company.employees = [employee]

    assert employee.is_registered 
    assert employee in company.employees

However, if you mutate a persistent attribute, the change will not be reflected in dataClay::

    company = Company("ABC")
    company.make_persistent()

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    # This will NOT register the employee in dataClay
    company.employees.append(employee)

    assert not employee.is_registered
    assert employee not in company.employees

This happens because when accessing ``company.employees``, it creates a local copy of the list.
The ``append()`` only updates this local copy. To update the list in dataClay, we have to assign
the new list to the attribute. For example, this will also register the employee::

    company = Company("ABC")
    company.make_persistent()

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employees = company.employees
    employees.append(employee)
    # This will register the employee in dataClay
    company.employees = employees

    assert employee.is_registered 
    assert employee in company.employees

.. Another option would be to create a proxy of the list.
.. A new dataClay class that contains the list.
.. Check the :doc:`example/matrix` for an example.

Alias
-----

Objects with an alias are objects that have been explicitly named (similar to naming files).
Not all dataClay objects should have an alias. If an object has an alias, we can access it 
by using its name. On the other hand, objects without an alias can only be accessed by a reference 
from another object.

.. warning::
    The alias must be unique within the dataset. If we try to create an object
    with an alias that already exists, an exception will be raised.


To register an object with an alias, we can use the :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>`
method and pass the alias as the first parameter::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent("CEO")

Then, we can retrieve the object by using :meth:`get_by_alias() <DataClayObject.get_by_alias>`::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent("CEO")

    new_employee = Employee.get_by_alias("CEO")
    assert new_employee is employee

The alias can be removed by calling :meth:`delete_alias() <DataClayObject.delete_alias>` classmethod::

    Employee.delete_alias("CEO")

Get, Put & Update
-----------------

Previously we have been using dataClay objects in a object-oriented manner.
However, we can also use dataClay like a standard object store with
``get``, ``put`` and ``update`` methods.

We can register and object with :meth:`dc_put(alias) <DataClayObject.dc_put>`.
This method always requires an alias::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.dc_put("CEO")

And we can clone a registered object with :meth:`dc_clone() <DataClayObject.dc_clone>`::

    new_employee = employee.dc_clone()
    assert new_employee.name == employee.name
    assert new_employee is not employee

Or using :meth:`dc_clone_by_alias(alias) <DataClayObject.dc_clone_by_alias>` classmethod::
    
    new_employee = Employee.dc_clone_by_alias("CEO")

We can update a registered object from another object of the same class with :meth:`dc_update(from_object) <DataClayObject.dc_update>`::
    
    new_employee = Employee("Marc", 7000.0)
    employee.dc_update(new_employee)
    assert employee.name == "Marc"

Or with :meth:`dc_update_by_alias(alias, from_object) <DataClayObject.dc_update_by_alias>` classmethod::
    
    new_employee = Employee("Marc", 7000.0)
    Employee.dc_update_by_alias("CEO", new_employee)

Commit message:

Add add_alias and get_aliases to testing and documentation

docs/user-guide.rst, after:

User Guide
==========

.. currentmodule:: dataclay

.. note::
    You can also follow this guide by running side-by-side all the commands with the 
    :doc:`examples/quickstart` example.


Installation
------------

dataClay can be installed with `pip <https://pip.pypa.io>`_:

.. code-block:: console

  $ python3 -m pip install dataclay


Defining Classes
----------------

The model provider is responsible for designing and implementing class models: the data structure,
the methods, and the relationships that applications can use to access and process data.

A minimal dataClay class is defined like this:

.. literalinclude:: /../examples/quickstart/model/company.py
   :language: python

All dataClay classes must inherit from :class:`DataClayObject`. 

It is required to `annotate <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/annotations.html>`_ the fields that
are intended to be persisted in dataClay. The remaining fields will be ignored and will only be 
accessible by the local instance.

The methods should be decorated with :func:`@activemethod <activemethod>` to specify that they will be
executed in dataClay if the object is persistent. The rest of the methods will always be executed locally.

Connect Client
--------------

To connect to a dataClay, create a :class:`Client` instance and provide the host, username,
password and dataset to connect to. You can provide it as arguments or as environment variables:

- ``DC_HOST``: Hostname of the dataClay instance (i.e. metadata)
- ``DC_PORT``: Port of the dataClay instance (i.e. metadata)
- ``DC_USERNAME``: Username to connect to dataClay
- ``DC_PASSWORD``: Password to connect to dataClay
- ``DC_DATASET``: Dataset to connect to

.. code-block:: python

  from dataclay import Client

  client = Client(
    host="127.0.0.1", port="16587", username="testuser", password="s3cret", dataset="testdata"
  )

You can start the connection by calling :meth:`start() <Client.start>`
and stop it with :meth:`stop() <Client.stop>`::

    client.start()
    # do something
    client.stop()

You can also use the client as a context manager::

  with client:
      # do something

Make Persistent
---------------

To make a dataClay object persistent, call its :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>` method:: 

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent()

Then all methods decorated with :func:`@activemethod <activemethod>` will be executed in dataClay::

    payroll = employee.get_payroll(50) # One remote call

And all annotated attributes will be accessed and updated in dataClay,
potentially reducing the local memory footprint::

    employee.salary = 2000.0 # One remote call
    print(employee.name, employee.salary) # Two remote calls


Assign backend
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Every dataClay object is owned by a backend. When calling :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>`
we can specify the backend where the object will be registered. If no backend is specified, the object will be
registered in a random backend.

You can get a list of backend IDs with :meth:`get_backends() <Client.get_backends>`
and register a dataClay object to one of the backends::

    backend_ids = list(client.get_backends())
    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent(backend_id=backend_ids[0])

Recursive
^^^^^^^^^

By default, :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>` registers the current object
and all the dataClay objects referenced by it in a recursive manner::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    company = Company("ABC", employee)

    # company and employee are registered
    company.make_persistent()
    assert employee.is_registered

..
    This behavior can be disabled by passing ``recursive=False`` 
    to :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>`::

        employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
        company = Company("ABC", employee)

        company.make_persistent(recursive=False)
        assert company.is_registered
        assert not employee.is_registered

Automatic persistence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When you add a new reference of a dataClay object to a persistent object, 
it is automatically registered::

    company = Company("ABC")
    company.make_persistent()

    # New dataClay object
    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    # This will register the employee in dataClay
    company.employees = [employee]

    assert employee.is_registered 
    assert employee in company.employees

However, if you mutate a persistent attribute, the change will not be reflected in dataClay::

    company = Company("ABC")
    company.make_persistent()

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    # This will NOT register the employee in dataClay
    company.employees.append(employee)

    assert not employee.is_registered
    assert employee not in company.employees

This happens because when accessing ``company.employees``, it creates a local copy of the list.
The ``append()`` only updates this local copy. To update the list in dataClay, we have to assign
the new list to the attribute. For example, this will also register the employee::

    company = Company("ABC")
    company.make_persistent()

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employees = company.employees
    employees.append(employee)
    # This will register the employee in dataClay
    company.employees = employees

    assert employee.is_registered 
    assert employee in company.employees

.. Another option would be to create a proxy of the list.
.. A new dataClay class that contains the list.
.. Check the :doc:`example/matrix` for an example.

Alias
-----

Objects with an alias are objects that have been explicitly named (similar to naming files).
Not all dataClay objects should have an alias. If an object has an alias, we can access it 
by using its name. On the other hand, objects without an alias can only be accessed by a reference 
from another object.

.. warning::
    The alias must be unique within the dataset. If we try to create an object
    with an alias that already exists, an exception will be raised.


To register an object with an alias, we can use the :meth:`make_persistent() <DataClayObject.make_persistent>`
method and pass the alias as the first parameter::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent("CEO")

Then, we can retrieve the object by using :meth:`get_by_alias() <DataClayObject.get_by_alias>`::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.make_persistent("CEO")

    new_employee = Employee.get_by_alias("CEO")
    assert new_employee is employee

The alias can be removed by calling :meth:`delete_alias() <DataClayObject.delete_alias>` classmethod::

    Employee.delete_alias("CEO")

We can add an alias to a registered object by calling :meth:`add_alias() <DataClayObject.add_alias>`::

    employee.add_alias("CFO")

And we can get all the aliases of an object with :meth:`get_aliases() <DataClayObject.get_aliases>`::

    aliases = employee.get_aliases()
    assert "CFO" in aliases
    assert "CEO" in aliases


Get, Put & Update
-----------------

Previously we have been using dataClay objects in a object-oriented manner.
However, we can also use dataClay like a standard object store with
``get``, ``put`` and ``update`` methods.

We can register and object with :meth:`dc_put(alias) <DataClayObject.dc_put>`.
This method always requires an alias::

    employee = Employee("John", 1000.0)
    employee.dc_put("CEO")

And we can clone a registered object with :meth:`dc_clone() <DataClayObject.dc_clone>`::

    new_employee = employee.dc_clone()
    assert new_employee.name == employee.name
    assert new_employee is not employee

Or using :meth:`dc_clone_by_alias(alias) <DataClayObject.dc_clone_by_alias>` classmethod::
    
    new_employee = Employee.dc_clone_by_alias("CEO")

We can update a registered object from another object of the same class with :meth:`dc_update(from_object) <DataClayObject.dc_update>`::
    
    new_employee = Employee("Marc", 7000.0)
    employee.dc_update(new_employee)
    assert employee.name == "Marc"

Or with :meth:`dc_update_by_alias(alias, from_object) <DataClayObject.dc_update_by_alias>` classmethod::
    
    new_employee = Employee("Marc", 7000.0)
    Employee.dc_update_by_alias("CEO", new_employee)
